Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricard Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Mazria Shima. She is a senior
lecturer in Philosophy in the School of Philosophy, Psychology
and Language Sciences at the University of Edinburgh. And
today we're focusing on her second book, the most
recent when The Brain Abstracted Simplification in the History
and Philosophy of Neuroscience. And she has another book
also uh titled Outside Color Perceptual Science and The
Puzzle of Color in Philosophy. So Dr Chim Muta,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah.
Thank, thank you, Ricardo. Thanks for inviting me. Nice
to be here.
So, what is the main argument that you put
forth in your book? And what exactly is this
idea of simplification in science and more specifically in
neuro science?
Yeah. Well, the main, the main argument in the
book I I'll talk about that first. Um There's
an overarching narrative of the book which I think
in the context of Philosophy of neuroscience. It makes
sense to think a bit about where philosophy of
neuroscience originated in a, as a academic field. So
it started in the 19 eighties through work of
people like Paul and Patricia Churchland who developed this
research program called Neuro Philosophy. I believe you've had
Patricia Churchland on your own. Yeah. Yeah. Um So
the, the aim of neuro philosophy was to look
at all of these exciting new results in neuroscience
and see if they could be applied to long
standing questions within the philosophy of mind. Say about
the nature of consciousness. What is perception, what is
decision making? Do we have free will? Um So
the idea was that the results of neuroscience would
be telling us something significant and um quite readily
interpretable to philosophers concerning the nature of cognition, the
nature of uh the brain states which give rise
to mental states. Um My overarching argument in the
book is that there's a problem inherent in your
philosophy given that um it's in it's typical and
unavoidable in scientific practice um to simplify the subject
matter that they're investigating. Uh So we can, we'll
talk more about simplification as we go on in
this interview with um uh examples and so forth.
But the point is that the slogan, if you
like is the brain is far more complex than
can be represented in any one particular scientific model
or theory. So when neuroscientists give us a model
or a account of what decision making is what
free will might be, what perception is, this is
always going to be a drastic simplification of the
actual complexity of the brain states which give rise
to cognition. So given this mismatch between the actual
complexity of the brain and the simplified scientific representations,
um we can't just take neuroscience and say this
is directly applicable to the questions that we have
in philosophy of mind, to the things that we
want to ask about how the brain gives rise
to cognition and therefore what cognition um essentially is.
So I have a very interesting quote here from
the book. Uh AT a certain point, you say,
as a religious and self avowedly naturalistic science and
philosophy of science were in the century after Nietzsche,
the basics of the belief system were not updated.
Beauty truth and parsimony were left high on pal.
So could you explain this particularly the second bit
about beauty truth and parsimony? I I found really
interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. So this is this is from the preface
of the book. So I was, I was being
a little bit condensed and not exactly explaining everything
going on the background with those ideas. Um So
I do argue in the introduction to the book
that one of the reasons for um the conviction
that many scientists have that when they discover when
they develop a simplified theory model, that this is
discovering something inherently simple about the natural world. I
argue that this is has some roots in um
the theo theological background of science. So as many
um historians of science have noticed um science didn't
just spring up independently in a cultural vacuum. Um
The original scientists were what's known as natural philosophers,
people like Newton. Um um AND Galileo, of course,
even though he's always presented as having this big
dispute with the church, he was interested in um
natural philosophy and ultimately theology as well. So people
were motivated to study the natural world in order
to find out about God through God's work. So
natural philosophy and natural theology were interconnected disciplines. And
one of the reasons people had the conviction and
early on in the development of science that by
finding simplicity um in nature, that you would learn
something about God's mind was coming from this idea
that God worked in a way that was rationally
intelligible. Simple e God has a simple, eternal and
changeable nature. All of these sort of notions that
come quite directly from monotheism found their way as
part of the motivation for scientists um to seek
simplicity in nature. And um so, so um one
of the, it's more specifically on that quotation, you
just read out um the thing at the back
of my mind was actually um Nietzsche's criticism of
Plato. So, um Nietzsche um you know, obviously, uh
thought a lot about the history of religion and
how that connected with the history of science and
a history of philosophy. Um He very much emphasized
that Christianity was a version of Platonism, like a
popularized version of Platonism. Um And a core tenet
of the Platonic theory was that the world that
we see around us in nature, the world of
appearances is somehow illusory, but the underlying reality is
simple, eternal unchanging. This is the world of the
forms. So there's a way of thinking about platonism,
which tells us even if nature seems complex, it's
not complex, really underlying nature are these simple eternal
forms and laws of nature. And you can see
how that connects with how scientists have tried to
investigate natures, sort of breaking down the data sets
which seem to be really messy and complicated and,
and looking for underlying patterns which are very intelligible
and, and fixed. Um So Nietzsche's, um if you
like criticism of Plato was that there's something kind
of self deceptive about that Platonic account of knowledge,
which is to say that what Plato thought he
was doing is saying, oh, knowledge is just this
contemplation, this disinterested discovery about h how nature is
that it's not con connected with our human purposes
and like kind of low desires just to get
stuff and change things to how that suit us.
And he said that was self deceptive because ultimately,
what knowledge is directed to is will to power
is getting more stuff that we want is furthering
our own, like almost selfish desires. And um what
I'm saying in that little snippet is that actually,
if we look at science, when we think that
science is just telling us about how nature operates
in this kind of disinterested way. We should actually
remember that what science is doing in the world
today. It's very much connected with technology. It's very
much connected with how people want to um you
know, could be in a good sense like cure
diseases or it could be just purely economic gain,
but it's connected with if you like human desires
and ambitions. So when we think of science as
just like idealistically trying to um achieve a view
of the world, which combines beauty, truth and parsimony,
simplicity instead of goodness, we should remember. Actually, there's
some more like low level ambitions there,
right? No, II I, to be honest, I really
had to include this quote here in our conversation
because I'm quite fond of Nietzsche's philosophy and I've
interviewed many niches scholars for the show. So I
I thought that it would make for uh I
mean, uh for, for some good observations here about
science and related topics. So,
yeah, I mean, certainly I think he's um he's
right to like look at him like with heidegger
as this prophet for the technological age, whether you
have a positive or negative view on that. And
I think there's a lot of insights into our
current technological situation that we can get from um
reading Nietzsche. And I think it's he's not so
distant from a lot of other ideas and current
analytic philosophy of science because there's been this big
pragmatist turn. Um PEOPLE are not just me, plenty
of philosophers of science are looking at how science
is connected with technology. And and um and you
can see parallels between what Nietzsche said and then
late slightly um following him the American pregnancy. So
really criticizing this view of knowledge is purely disinterested,
right? So nowadays, we hear a lot about big
data, data science, stuff like that. And in the
book, you also talk at a certain point about
the contention between what do you call a classical
scientific approach and a data driven engineering approach. Uh
Could you tell us about that?
Yeah. So the classical scientific approach, you can think
of that as a manifestation of this this Platonic
ideal which says that a scientific theory should be
intelligible to the person that develops it. It should
take um a subset of the data that it's
possible to um uh arrive at relevant to a
particular um phenomenon and gets if you like to
the core essential heart of what is underlying that
data set. Uh For example, a law of nature
which can be used to predict the data set.
And when you have that, if you like essential
um uh set of principles which underlie your data
set. The idea is that this is for all
time and space going to be the same principle
that will explain any kind of data set anywhere
else in the natural world relevant to this particular
philosophy. So you have this combination of like the
intelligibility of these principles to the scientist and the
conviction that these principles will extrapolate, extend anywhere else
that the scientists might want to apply them. So
that's I think essential to this classical approach. But
what you see in data driven science is that
you really dial down your ambition for the intelligibility
of um the model um that you're gonna generate
um on the basis of your data set, you're
ending up with mathematically much more complex models using
machine learning, which um you can use to predict
um items in your distribution. But you're not gonna
have a clear cut set of principles or laws
of nature which um help you give that, help
you have that sense of really understanding what's going
on in the world. So that, that, you know,
that nice subjective feeling of, I really figured out
how this phenomenon works. You'd you have less um
of that. Um And your, and you're kind of
reliant on your data set being based on uh
when you have a novel data set, you're reliant
on the new data being within the same distribution
of your original data set that that model um
was originally based on. So you kind of give
up on that conviction that you can extrapolate for
time and place.
So we're going to get back to simplicity in
a second. But since your book is focused on
neuroscience specifically, uh what would you say are some
of the biggest challenges with the study of the
brain? And why is the brain, at least apparently
so complex?
And so with uh when we're talking about the
complexity of an object, and I'm, I'm not a
complexity scientist myself, um I talk a bit of
in the introduction about, of the book about definitions
of complexity that come from complexity science and how
they relate a bit to what I'm doing. But
this is just a sort of layman's two complexity
science um take here and some ideas that are
relevant is that when you have a complex system,
you have a lot of heterogeneity of the parts.
So there's if you break the system down into
parts and look what the different individual components are,
they'll be very different among themselves and they'll also
tend not to be um stable or fixed in
their um in their properties. So the parts could
not only be various, but they can also be
variable across time and um they'll be densely interacting
with one another. So it's not. So it means
that what happens over here in one part of
the system can affect in many different ways what's
going over here in another part of the system.
So if you look at the brain, you see
all of those things uh to a high degree.
So there are very many different neuronal types within
the brain and strict, I mean, neuro anatomists classify
neuron types into different sorts. Like you have pedal
cells or pinia cells and they have a like
overall morphology which is recognizable. But if you look
in the details, even one individual neuron looks a
bit different from another, it's like trees in a
forest with a branching structure means that each neuron
has a, a little bit like people, individual characteristics.
And these are thought to be uh functionally relevant
as well because the different branching structures as connectivity
within the neurons around them neurons are interconnected with
one another to a high degree. Um That's there's
this very, you know, trillions of synapses like the
connecting junctions within the brain. We should, we should
also not forget that neurons aren't the only type
of the brain. You also have these other cells
called glial cells, which used to be thought of
as just like they're supporting the neurons. But actually,
they seem to have a role in cognition except
most people don't study them. So we know relatively
little about them. And if we talk about the
variability across time from um one day or month
to the next, the brain is also changing all
the time. So when we form memories, um what's
happening is the brain is plastic, it's altering the
connections between the neurons, it's altering things about the
physiology of those neurons as well. So what you
um so this inherent changeability is this um challenge
for the scientific ambition in the classical sense of
just finding fixed properties of a system which will
always allow you to predict what will happen.
And on the topic of simplification, you talk about
mainly three different simplification or simplifying strategies in neuroscience.
One of them is mathematic, another is reduction. And
the third one is the formation of analogies between
the complicated and familiar neural system and the simpler
and more familiar artifact artifact. Uh Could you explain
them? I mean, a reduction, I guess that I've
already talked about on the show. It's a, a
quite common topic but the uh particularly the other
two, if you could explain them.
Yeah, mathematic. Um So the, the quite basic thought
here is that when you take an object in
the natural world and describe it in mathematical terms
with numbers and the relationships between those numbers, what
you're doing is you're abstract away from most of
the properties of an object. So if I look
at the things around me, I can, it's not
on camera, but I've got some plants around me.
It has a whole bunch of qualitative properties. Like
it's got the color of the leaves, the different
different leaves have different shapes to them. But if
you're representing mathematically, you might just say, I'm gonna
count the number of leaves, I'm just gonna measure
the leaves. So you're sort of rig you're converting
all of those sort of rich kind of unique
set of properties that I might find in as
I look at the thing and saying, OK, what
matters is just a few numerical variables. Um So
that's leaving behind um a lot of the complexity
is that is there in the natural world. So
in, in the history of science and the current
day um sort of background, philosophy of a lot
of scientists, there's this idea that all of those
qualitative details of what's there and in an object
in the natural world are somehow irrelevant to how
it's operating fundamentally. And I think this again goes
back to this Platonic tradition. So if you think
about what Plato said about um the world, he,
he was almost uh there's things that approach, this
idea that the maths um geometry is more real
than what we experience of the world through our
senses. So, underlying this imperfect um messy, not hard
to define sensory world of appearances. There is a
geometric structure underlying everything. Um So when scientists mathematic,
I think they often think to themselves, well, we're
just to the essences with the essential properties of
what's there. But what I'm saying is that actually
they're using a simplifying strategy. All of those details
are there in the real object in the natural
world, whether it's a plant or someone's brain. And
maybe those details do matter to what that um
object essentially is as a, as a living thing.
Um You mentioned that reduction is uh often talk
about because uh reductionism is one of those uh
words that has a bad name almost in, in
biology. It's, it's been a very useful strategy. I
mean, all it means is instead of trying to
take a whole organism or a whole organ organ
by itself as a whole system, you begin with
analyzing the parts, the building blocks with a hope
or expectation that by studying those parts, you'll get
some insights into the whole. Now it has limitations
because um if you study parts in isolation, when
you're dealing with a complex system, the parts behavior
will be context dependent, which means that you'll be
limited in what you can discover about even about
the parts by looking at them independently of the
whole system. So it has, it has certainly has
its place certainly with um technological ambitions. Um But
yeah, it's, it can't be the whole story about
how living organisms work. Um But yeah, forming analogies
though, I write a lot about that in the
book because um the notion of the computer as
an analogy for what brains are, um I'm saying
has been hugely influential and dominant in the recent
history of neuroscience. So a nice way of thinking
about why analogies are important in science is that
if we look at the world around us, of
living objects, um they're complex and it's kind of
opaque what's going on inside them. Um Going back
to Aristotle people who looked at living objects like
um uh and, and thought about them. In terms
of all the parts of a living object have
um functions. They're a bit tool like so hand
you might think of it. Well, it's like a
pining tool. It's like a grasping tool. There's all
of this, if you like seeming goal directed in
living objects and when you um make comparisons between
living objects or the organs, organ literally means tool.
By the way, that's where the world is thrive
for a living organ. And you make a comparison
with a tool that someone has made then that
gives you like a clue. And maybe I understand
how this um living organ works. If I know
the principles of how this um artifact, how this
tool that someone has made according to their own
um understanding of physical um relationships, then I think,
well, maybe in nature, this is um how, how,
what the principles of operation are behind this organ.
So what I'm saying, I mean, analogies don't only
figure in biology, but I think they have a
very particular role in the biological sciences because of
this comparison between like the um the tool, like
nature of many living things and the way that
people have built so many different tools and then
have ideas about how those work, which then get
imported into their understanding of biological items.
Yes, we're going to get back to the computer
metaphor of the brain in a bit. Uh But
before that, why do scientists seek simplicity? I mean,
is this something that is just unavoidable? And what
are the goals that they have in mind with
simplicity?
Yeah. So, so this this goes back to that
divide between Plato and Nietzsche ultimately. So if you
ask AAA Platonist broadly speaking in, in that broad
tradition, why scientists would seek um simplicity, they would
say well, because nature inherently is simple. So when
you, when you find some simple laws or principles
in nature, you have discovered the truth about reality
that was hidden before you did your investigation. If
you ask a Nietzsche and this is the camp
that I'm in. This is the argument that I'm
presenting in this book, I'm saying, scientists seek simplicity
because they want to control the natural world, humans
are limited in their cognitive capacities. If we try
to just take in all of the complexity that's
there in nature, like you have to keep track
of all of the different individual items and how
they change from day to day and how they
interact with one another. And we'd just be hopelessly
confused. We wouldn't be able to keep track of
anything. Um Human language is itself a simplifying scheme
because when I talk about leaves on this plant
next to me, I'm using that one word leaf
to apply to all of those items which by
themselves actually have these differences. So I'm saying science
kind of exaggerates that it, it imposes simplifying schemes
on natural objects so that we're not cognitively overloaded
and we can focus on certain relationships of dependencies,
certain causal relationships that people will want to control
and manipulate in order to get the results that
they want in the world around them.
But I, I mean, just to clarify one point
here, uh how do you look at that? I
mean, do you think about it as a simply
a limitation but a sort of unavoidable limitation of
our even our cognition itself? So there's no problem
with that. It's just a matter of scientists being
aware of that and in the way that it
should weigh on their interpretations of the data and
so on or is it actually something problematic that
we should try to overcome in specific ways?
Yeah. So I think it's more the form, there
is an inherent limitation on how much a human
being can understand in terms of how many variables
in a model that are going to be able
to make sense of. Like we can't think in
much more than three dimensions because you know how
our sensory experience of the world is. We live
in this 3d space and we have intuitions about
three dimensions can kind of stretch it to four
and five when you have a 10 or more
dimensional data set, your intuitions about what goes on
is going to break down. So I think that
that is an inherent limitation, but I think that
there are some schemers or way of thinking that
people use, that could be more or less drastically
simplified. I actually think that when people use metaphors
to understand the world in literature, the part of
the value of metaphorical language can actually be that
it, it kind of encompasses a bit more of
the complexity and the inherent almost vagueness or changeability
of things in nature. So I think as um
science has become more and more dominant as a
way of thinking of the world, it's maybe tempted
people to underestimate um how much of things in
the world around them are complex and interdependent. And
there are other um ways of thinking and you
can think historically and also cross culturally that maybe
are more sensitive to that. So I think it's
important to be pluralistic. So given that science has
to simplify it, we should also say that it's
worth also um paying value to even within sciences,
different approaches that maybe simplify less drastically and also
outside of science um ways that we can be
more sensitive to complexity, even if we can't fully
grasp it in all of its details.
You mentioned pluralism there. I want to ask you
a, a specific question about that. So in the
book, you take preference for a more pluralist and
perspective is approach to neuroscience in this case over
a sort of standard scientific realism and empiricism approach.
Uh WHY? And uh what does that mean? Exactly.
Yeah. So, so to use our sort of platonic
figurehead again and again, I don't want to say
this is all like stemming from Plato's dialogues down
today. But just like following this idea that there
is a consistent lineage here. So that I'm saying
essentially that if you take scientific realism today, there's
something platonic about it. So the mainstream scientific realists,
they say our best scientific theories are giving us
a representation of how things are um in nature,
which are not observable to our senses. So um
a classic example for scientific realism would be to
say when a the theory in physics posits electrons
in order to explain certain phenomena, you know, you
might observe electric shocks and things like that, you
have good reason to say that those particles electrons
exist. Um So they're saying that there is if
you like a world behind the senses and that
is what the scientists are allowing us to know
about. So empiricists, they actually were very uh resistant
to this metaphysical um interpretation of science. And they,
they're actually almost um a bit Nietzsche in here
and in posts like Ernst mark, actually, people made
the connection between him and Nietzsche, which is interesting.
Uh So he's another 19th century uh scientist and
philosopher and he said actually all we have is
the world of appearances, we have lots of sensory
data. What science is doing is just finding connections
between this data and representing them in an economical
way. Um So in this sort of um divide
between uh classical scientific realism and empiricism, I'm sort
of fairly sympathetic to this empiricist um tradition. So
in saying that like with, as Mark said, we
shouldn't interpret our scientific theories as like telling us
simple laws and principles which exist behind the century
data. Um For me, this debate about the existence
of particles is not relevant because I'm not talking
about physics. I'm talking about objects in biology, which
everyone can observe. But the question is, should we
be realist in our interpretation of the theories and
models that scientists develop? And what I'm saying is
that when those theories and models um impose simplifications
on the observable data that we can encounter regarding
those systems, we shouldn't believe that the simplification is
more real than the actual observable data and saying
that actually um nature is irreducibly complex. And for
this reason, multiple um theoretical approaches are all needed
because if you think of it as a mountain
with needing lots of viewpoints on it there, um
You, you can, you can't take in in one
view all of the complexity, all of the operations
that are there in that one system. So you
need multiple viewpoints in order for each of them
to sort of grasp something about what's going on.
So this is what motivates the pluralism. It actually
is founded on this idea that underlying everything is
just this irreducible complexity. And we can only grasp
it in, in these small um piecemeal approaches. If
you can think of each approach as like one
viewpoint, one perspective on a thing I know you've
had on your uh podcast, Mia mastery who at
length on perspective. So I'll let your listeners go
to that episode to him or specifically what this
notion of perspective is, is.
Yeah. Yeah. It, it was a great episode and
I will link to it in the description of
this one. So uh in the book, you go
through an example, I guess an illustrative example of
an early theory in neuroscience reflects a theory that
got very popular theory about the organization of the
brain and the nervous system that then uh later
was dis discarded. Could you tell us about it?
Uh WHAT reflects the theory was and how and
why it fell and perhaps then we can get
a better understanding of why it might be lust
of some of the issues you're pointing to in
the
book. Yeah. Yeah. So the um reflex theory, it
was it was dominant. So just before the start
of the 20th century going into the 19 thirties,
so that's the time period we're talking about. So
it rose um following some really important discoveries about
um neurophysiology that happened um mid 19th century. Um
So people had like theorized about reflex action since
the 17th century, since dear. But what happened in
the 19th century with more detailed um probing of
the nervous system was that um this is Charles
Bell. Um There one figure that found this is
that people um found that there was different nerves
um that were responsible for uh sensory input into
the spine. And then another set of nerves which
sort of linked um in an arc connected to
that responsible for the motor response, the movement that
was um uh ha would happen in response to
the sensory input. So if you think about what
reflexes are like the kneecap reflex that the doctor
might do, that's giving you a particular sensory input.
And you have this very predictable motor response and
reaction to that or if someone uh throws an
object towards your eye, you immediately blink. So there's
this quick um sensory response um elicited in the
quick motor output. Um So this idea of sort
of decomposing the nervous system into the sensory input
side and the motor output side, um they would
be linked at the spinal cord. Um This served
to explain many behaviors and responses like the eye
blink and the various um other um reflexes with
the limbs. So these were like success stories for
neurophysiology at the time. And then what people did
is kind of extrapolate from that and say, well,
what if everything that the brain and nervous system
is doing is actually a kind of reflex response.
So what if, what's going on in the brain
is actually more reflexes coming in being connected with
another set of motor outputs and then everything that
someone says and does might ultimately be decomposable into
a set of um reflex responses. So what I
say in um um in the book or explain
in the book is that it's a kind of
reductionism. So looking at the parts of the nervous
system as reflexes. So if you like it's a
physiological part, these isolated sensory motor responses are what
the building blocks of the nervous system are. So
the thought is if we just study reflexes, then
ultimately, we're going to be able to explain more
complex um behaviors and um neural responses. So, some
of the very major uh early 20th century uh
neurophysiologist like Charles Sherrington spent a lot of their
career um studying reflex responses in dogs and cats
um under certain experimental preparations, which were used to
kind of generate more predictive, predictable reflex uh like
responses. Um But ultimately, um this um approach fell
out of favor because um there were just too
many um anomalies, too many um cases where it
just became clear that the um the reflex theory
was not able to explain this universally in neuroscience
in the way that people had thought. But I
should also mention that there was a lot of
overlap in the twenties and thirties that developed between
this reflex theory and behavioral psychology. So the notion
that ultimately, what we're doing when we behave is
sort of um forming um predictable responses to these
um sensory inputs. You can see how there's a
psychology version of that. So as Pavlov described, you
know, the dog that salivates to food and then
you condition it and it salivates to the bell
as well. What you're looking for is this very
tight connection between a sensory input and a behavioral
output. So that behavioral level is in psychology is
being paralleled with this um neural level within the
physiology.
So in the context of the thesis you present
in the book, what would you say reflects a
theory is illustrative of? Exactly.
Yeah. So I'm using it if you like as
a cautionary tale to say that if if you
want to explain why scientists were so attracted to
this theory, even though looking at it in retrospect,
it seems so vastly oversimplified that how you you
ask yourself, how could anyone have been convinced that
this could be true? How could anyone think that
everything that's going on within the brain will just
boil down to sensory motor reflexes? What I'm saying
is it illustrates how alluring how compelling the goal
of simplicity can be. So once scientists are just
trying to find the simplest theory, they can be
misled into believing in a theory that in retrospect
is must be completely wrong. And so then you
have to ask, well, what in science today might
people be convinced by? Because they're so want to
believe in the simplicity that they ignore all of
the reasons for thinking. Well, this couldn't possibly be
true.
So after reflex theory of course, uh came the
rise of uh the idea that neural processes that
give rise to cognition are essentially computational. So what
does it mean for something to be computational? Specifically
the brain or neural processes? Uh WHAT does computational
mean exactly?
Yeah, I mean computational theory is a branch of
mathematics which is to do with uh what functions
are. So a function in mathematics is a fixed
relationship between an input and an output. Um So
addition, the function if you for any two numbers
or any or more numbers, um um the addition
function maps that onto a specific answer, which is
the sum of those numbers. So you can think
of a computation as describing this process that gets
you from the input to the output um as
described by the mathematical function. So in the context
of neuroscience, um saying that the brain or an
individual neuron even is a co is computational is
saying that what it's doing is it's taking inputs
and converting them uh in a well governed way
to an output. The rule governed way uh defined
by the function. And so this idea of transferring
computational ideas to neuroscience very happened very early in
the history of um the invention of computers. So,
you know, if you think of uh yeah, the
digital computer based on Alan Turing's ideas, they were
developed during the war, uh second World War and
it was actually in 1943 with mcculloch and Pitts.
Um This notion that individual neurons could be computational
devices was 1st 1st proposed. So they thought that
the dendrites of the neurons, the parts of the
neurons which um standardly taken just to receive like
inputs from another neuron around them. Phys. What this
actually means in the concrete world is just that
the um dendrites of the neurons are sensitive to
neurotransmitters that are coming from previous neurons. And this
modulates the electrical excitability of this neuron that is
receiving that neurotransmitter. Um But the thought was OK
is that you have these dendron. So the input
and the body of the neuron performs a computation
and this converts the signal on the output end
which will then go and um affect other neurons
in the network. Um So saying that that's how
you can say that an individual neuron is um
computational. If you just take those notions of input
output and function um connecting them and sort of
impose that template onto neurophysiology. And if you're thinking
of the brain as a whole being computational, people
would think in terms of like the whole, all
of our sensory systems being the inputs, we're taking
data from the world in the center of our
brains, we're performing this operation that converts those inputs
into a certain output. So the output would be
uh motor signals which shows what behavior is so
when I'm talking, um that's possible because my brain
is sending signals to my voice box. And so
if you like all behavior that ultimately is this
motor output.
So in the case of computational models of the
brain, are we working with an analogy here or
not?
Yeah. So I'm arguing that it's an analogy. Um
I, I point out though that the dominant view
I'd say amongst neuroscientists themselves and many people that
do philosophy of neuroscience says that the brain literally
is a computer. It's not just an analogy or,
or a comparison that one could make, but they're
saying that inherently the brain uh is a computational
device. Um What I'm arguing instead is that no,
for reasons to do with what I talked about
before that it's useful um for scientists to think
about biological organs in terms of tools that people
have made. Um THAT gives them a if you
like a way to try and thinking about how
the biological organ might work. So, and so for
that reason, people have been very attracted to the
comparison between brains and computers, not least because um
computers were designed in order to do tasks which
people um use their brains for to do cognitive
tasks. So the turing's vision of what the computer
was originally was to replace um the human computer.
So the digital computer was simply performing the tasks
done by a human computer and what the human
computer did. This is a job that was taken
over by A I back in the day, all
computers are a kind of artificial intelligence. It was
just doing sums all day. So we have people
used to be the only kinds of things that
could do sums all day. And now we have
uh, machines doing that. So the thought was, well,
there's a similarity in what computers and brains can
do. Let's see if we can understand the brains
as biological computers. Um And so I'm saying, well,
given the functional similarity in some respects between brains
and computers, it's a natural thing to do. There's
nothing wrong with this strategy in itself, but we
shouldn't just literally think that what, um, brains essentially
do is just the same thing as what computers,
digital computers essentially do.
But do you think there are still ways by
which the analogy can be scientifically useful or not?
Yeah. So I think all, uh all most analogies
and science, um, can be shown to have their
uses. Um, WHAT I mean, one way to think
about why it's useful. I like this, Mary Hesse's
um, notion of domestication. So if you think of
the things in nature, they're kind of wild and
not obvious in how they work. A tool is
something very domestic to people in the sense that
people have made it and makes sense to them.
So, what these analogies are doing is looking at
what's unfamiliar through the lens of something that is
familiar and makes sense. Um So that certainly gives
scientists a way to like not be overwhelmed by
just the opacity, the um the just the alien
nature of what they're trying to investigate. Um I
in the chapter in the book, I look at
this sort of historically about this early research that
was done on that interface between computer science and
neuroscience and that whole cybernetics movement. And um the
thought was that OK, we look at the nervous
system, we've got no idea how motor control happens.
But what if we build a robot that does
some of the things that I like what a
person does when they are behaving with motor control.
At least we've got a clue or like the
beginnings of a theory about what might be happening.
Neurophysiological, of course, analogies can be misleading because every
analogy is based on a partial similarity but not
identity. So two objects related by analogy will be
similar in some ways but also different in many
ways. And my criticism of the computational framework, um
when people interpret it literally is that it tempts
them just to ignore the differences between um biological
brains and um artificial computing machines.
And of course, since we're talking about simplification in
science here, we also have to talk a little
bit about modeling because that's also something that scientists
do something that is I guess fundamental in science.
So in the case of cognitive neuroscience specifically. Um
How do you look at the relationship between modeling
techniques and experimental practice, for example.
Yeah. So, so there's a chapter in the book
which focuses specifically on this theme and it's um
and it's um making the argument that models um
all models simplify and that famous slogan by George
Mark Bots. Um All models are false but some
are useful um still models uh he says are
false because they all simplify, right. Um They no
model can just take in all of the um
complexity that's there observably. Um But I'm saying the
most effective modeling strategies um don't just begin at
the modeling stage. It's really important how you generate
the data in order to um get a nice
tractable model out of it. So I'm talking a
lot about the um experimental techniques that have been
used in uh phy neurophysiology of the visual system.
So this is work on um primary visual cortex
going through the 19 fifties onwards, how scientists were
really um careful about how they prepared their animals,
the use of different behavioral restraints, something mostly as
drastic as anesthesia in the early stages, really careful
about how they chose their stimuli. A lot of
these um techniques had the precise effect of making
data sets which had less variants than they would
do if you just um recorded from the activity
of neurons just in uncontrolled viewing conditions. So when
a cat is roaming around the park jumping around
hunting, doing all kinds of things. It's very hard,
you're gonna get a data set, which is very
hard to, um, model because there'll be very little
repeatability of responses from one time to the next.
If you anesthetize the cat put it in a
harness, basically, stop it, having any kind of, uh,
cognitive activity pretty much other than the precise stimulus
that you've chose to, um, make it few, then
you're gonna get neurophysiological responses which are kind of
consistent with um mapping um from particular stimulus to
particular um activity profile. There's still actually a lot
of variants, but it's gonna be way less than
if you just um approach things in the world.
Um So just the variability of neuroscientists to have
data sets which then they could uh build models
of was dependent on all of this experimental methodology.
Um That happened in the first place though we
talk about how with current technologies um using machine
learning and very, very wide sampling um of neurons
when they're recorded in the brain, people are actually
trying to develop data sets which are more naturalistic.
So more like what how the primary visual cortex
would work if the cat is jumping around the
park as opposed to anesthetized in the lab. And
that is um that is leading to, you know,
in interesting classes of new models which kind of
fall down, I suppose on this question of intelligibility
of the model because you can like find mathematical
relationships in these very, very high dimensional data sets.
But that ability for the scientists to actually say,
aha, I've figured out the operating principles of this
system that that gets reduced once you're dealing with
data sets of such complexity.
So another very important topic here has to do
with representation. And uh I've already had on the
show, people like doctors, Randall Beer and Luis Wave.
And we did the entire interviews, almost two hour
interviews just on the topic of computational representational approaches
to neuroscience and dynamical systems theory. We're also going
to get into that in a second. But uh
how do you approach the topic of representations? I
mean, what are representations and where exactly is the
role that you see they play in brain research?
Yeah. So the question, what are representations? I mean,
there's philosophers that spend their whole career on that
question. Uh So it's, it's not actually my area
of ecstasy. So I'm not going to go into
like a technical definition. I give you uh the
different views on that in terms of a debate
and how I like to think about it as
a philosopher of science here is to think about
what, how are scientists using this notion of representation
clearly? What they're doing is sort of drawing from
uncontroversial cases of representation that are familiar from everyday
life. So if you think about, you know what
a map is, it's a kind of representation. It's
um standing in for the territory which is out
there in a city and just taking some of
the structural features of that territory and depicting them
in the map so that the person has a,
if you like a substitute for the experience of
walking around the whole city, you can see a
subset of those relationships there in the map. Um
And it allows you to do certain tasks like
plan a route through a, through a town. Um
All, all language is representational. When I talk about
a dog or a cat, there's no dog or
cat in the room. Um But if I say
those words, then you're able to like uh refer
to the same item um as me um uh
paintings and all kinds of things can be representations
in everyday life. Um A core um philosophical term
that goes with the study of representations is this
notion of intentionality. It's this idea that a representation
is a physical object which uh this notion of
intentionality um literally comes from the idea of it
reaching out to the world around it to some
object that it's aiming to depict. Um So this
is the um feature of representations that I I'm
arguing is particularly important with the use of this
notion of neural representation. So what I'm saying is
that when neuroscientists say that activity in parts of
the visual cortex represents certain things like it might
represent a face. What the neuroscientist is drawing on
is this comparison between say um a picture which
might represent a face. Um Not because through, well,
maybe that's not such a good example because a
picture, how's this kind of structural similarity with a
face? So it would be better to say it's
like a word which might be used to represent
a face or a sentence which might represent a
face. So even though the sentence is not similar
to um a face, if you know um the
language you'll be able to decode the sentence and
like have conveyed in front of you um information
about the face. So if I say um oh,
the Mona Lisa had a face with an enigmatic
smile and she had long brown hair, you'll be
decoding this sentence, you'll um know something about that
face. So the idea would be so uh uh
neural activation and part of the fusiform face area
is representing a face because there is a neural
code which describes properties of that face. It sort
of reaches out in, in into the world around
it instead of just being about electrical activity, it's
actually about that face in the world. That notion
of intentionality comes in. This is all an account
of why neuroscientists think about neural activations in terms
of representation. Um uh An obvious point to make
here is that uh representations are central to how
people cognize it's a central explanatory notion in cognitive
science. So if you say that there are representations
in the brain, then you have this bridge from
neurophysiology to cognition. Because you're saying like how the
brain allows us to cognize the world is that
the brain already forms representations. Therefore, we can start
explaining how cognition is possible on that psychological level.
So that's something that many people have said about
why neuroscientists talk about representation. I say furthermore that
it's also a simplifying strategy because it permits scientists
to really focus on the relationship between an activation
in particular brain area and objects in the world
that those neurons are sensitive to and ignoring lots
of biological details about how those activations get caused.
Mhm So getting into the topic of a computational
slash representational approaches to neuroscience and then dynamical systems
theory approaches in the book, you take the example
of the motor cortex uh and how it functions
and its nature and the different ways people have
approached it. So um what would be then the
uh the more the common computational representational approach to
it and then the dynamical systems approach to the
motor cortex.
Yeah. So the um the uh computational representational approach,
it was is a bit earlier in its origins.
And what that says is that uh for motor
cortex is just like strip it around the top
of your head. Um Its role is to direct
um movement. So sending signals to the spinal cord
which ultimately cause your muscles to move And so
the theory about it being representational was to say
that neural activations in this motor cortex are representing
movements that you intend to make. So there is
as if like 1 to 1 correspondence between an
activation here and a particular movement like raising your
arm. Um And so that was a theory put
forward for the explanation of how motor cortex supports
um uh motor control because you simply represent your
motor intentions in the brain and then that signals
to your body to move in certain ways. Um
A bit of an obstacle for that theory um
came about through finding is of of like relative
instability of uh the relationship between these neural activations
and movements. So people sort of trying hard and
under controlled experimental situations to see. OK, what particular
movement does this neuron um serve? Is it um
what is it exactly representing even? Is it representing
like whole arm moves? Is it representing the velocity
of the arm movement? Is it representing the activation
of certain muscles? Um Is it doing that consistently
from one trial to another? It was very hard
to pin anything down on this? It everything did
seem to be a bit jelly like, yeah, there's
a clear relationship between motor cortex activity and muscle
um movements, but actually being precise in what that
relationship was became quite hard to theorize. Um So
in the purist um version, the dynamical systems approach
and this is um there's an influential paper by
um Krishna Shenoy and Mark Churchill and some other
authors, they describe a dynamical systems approach which should
have doesn't say that what the motor cortex is
doing is representing, representing any movement para parameters. They're
just saying this is a dynamical system which if
you like causally drives motor outputs. So they have
a, a different theory about the relationship between the
activity and the and the um the movement outputs.
They say uh it's a kind of a pattern
generator. They say this kind of cyclical rhythmic um
uh activity in motor cortex, which you can describe
using dynamical equations. This is if you like giving
lots of movement templates to the rest of the
body which is just coarsely driven by these activity
patterns. So in that paper, um they are um
describing the dynamical systems approach in the consultation or
representational one as being incompatible. But there's other theorists
and uh Randy Beer has written some interesting stuff
relevant to this that actually say no, these are
just two different perspectives on the same thing for
any object in the world. You can in certainly
in any object in cognitive science, you can um
describe it as computational representation or dynamical systems theory
or as a dynamical system and um they're not
ultimately incompatible. Um So there's people uh I think
John Krakow has argued this uh with respect to
hot field networks. So artificial neural networks can also
be described as dynamical systems. And you can sort
of think of these as doing computations and also
doing this whole um dynamical causal causally driving uh
thing as well.
That's very interesting. And I, I've noticed in my
interviews also that there are different views on how
compatible these two different sets of approaches are, some
people think that they, they are really incompatible, others,
others are more on the side of compatibility. But
uh if they are compatible, what does that tell
us about um how we understand and study the
brain? Because I, I mean, the question here is
if we can have a correct uh or uh
an approximation to an understanding of the brain through
two different sets of theories, I mean, what does
that tell us? I mean, because uh shouldn't it
be just one theory that would be correct here
or? Yeah.
Yeah. So this goes back to this question of
pluralism. Um So the, if you insist on incompatibility,
one of the things you're assuming in the background
is that one of these theories is getting essentially
at the truth of how the brain operates. And
the other theory is false. Um I'm saying that
both of these theories make simplifications in their own
way, which depart from ultimately the truth, the ground
truth of how the brain operates. So if you
think of a classical computational representational one, it's making
assumptions about the consistency of the neuronal um act
the neuronal, what the neuro what the neurons are
intending to represent. Um That's not true, that kind
of stability is not true of the actual brain.
If you take the dynamical systems approach is making
assumptions about, there's ultimately some sort of fixed laws
of way of behavior that might not be true.
But that's fine if you're saying with me that
all scientific theories are simplified in some ways. Um
And like all models, they have to depart from
the inherent complexity of the system. So it's sort
of an option for me to say, well, they're
compatible because they are both perspectives on this one
thing. Um They um simplify in different ways. Um
None of them are take, allowing you to discover
like the whole truth of how the motor cortex
works. Um So what I say in the end
of that chapter one on the motor cortex research
is that ultimately, we have to have this sort
of intellectual humility, this can humility um which says
that the thing in itself or the brain in
itself because of its inherent and irreducible complexity is
to some extent, um cognitively or epistemic inaccessible to
us, we can't have that ideal of full and
complete absolute once and forever theory of motor cortex,
which will just tell us everything that there is
to know about it have to accept that all
of our theoretical approaches will be limited in different
and perhaps complementary ways. Um But yeah, the, the
final complete theory of the brain in itself is
not going to be available.
And of course, nowadays, we also have uh ma
machine learning as a way of uh modeling and
studying different and not just neural processes, neural systems
but other aspects of reality. What would you say
are the pros and cons of using uh this
kind of methods?
Yeah. So, so I I got interested in machine
learning methods and neuroscience just because I began to
see how much um of neuroscience was changing because
of the developments in machine learning. So my home
area of neuroscience is actually uh vision science. And
um I grew up with learning and modeling um
visual responses with these mathematically very almost truly simple
equations. And there were limitations in um what kinds
of responses could be predicted with these um quite
simple models. So um my own research modeling, um
we could predict the responses of how people um
sensitivity would change to contrast of um black and
white stripy patterns. But if you took uh black
and white photographs, our models would have less predictive
value. Um So what happened with the machine learning
revolution? And this was kind of um kind of
following on like big advances in machine vision, you
know, object recognition, face recognition at the start of
this century sudden suddenly started to be achieved. Uh
WHAT happened is that like vision researchers and neuroscience
were looking at deep learning and saying, aha these
computers are doing vision. What can we learn about
the visual system from studying uh these kinds of
devices? And it turns out what you can do
is you can build very, very vast like million
parameter models of visual cortex, which allow you to
predict the responses of neurons to look at almost
a complete array of different stimulus types. But then
what you find is that the theoretical pre off
in terms of understanding how visual cortex is working
is more limited, at least in the mathematical details
of what you're studying. Because in the old theories,
um the old strategies, you had a few equations
and you could tell a story about OK, this
kind of function is an edge detector and this
feeds into this um other thing, right? Whereas when
you have a vast um deep convolutional neural network,
which you're using to model visual cortex, you can
say a few things like there's X number of
layers and there's certain connectivity types between the two
and this may or may not correspond to what
you see in the actual brain. But mathematically, it
tells you, I would say less about what's going
on. Other people might disagree with this. I mean,
this is something this is I'm just stating my
own position. There are people like um um people
that have argued that there's much more theoretically and
explanatory available with using deep learning methods and science.
Anyway, it's an ongoing debate
since, since we're on the topic of A I,
um how do you think we should deal with
the claims regarding the potential of A I systems
developing? Or, I mean, perhaps programming them even with
things like consciousness, general intelligence and perhaps this would
be a way of also connecting the discussion to
the idea of multiple realizable of cognition here, right?
So in your view, what do, what should we
make of those types of
claims? Yeah. So th this is going back to
um an argument that springs out of what we
were talking about before with the computer brain analogy.
Uh So I said before that the um we
need to pay as much attention to the differences
between computing machines and brains as to the similarities,
which this analogy points us towards um people who
sort of sort of lit are literal about the
brain being a kind of computer. What they're claiming
is that the similarity of like the overlapping properties
between brains and computers is what's essential to how
the brain serves cognition. So anything cognitively going on
in the brain and this includes consciousness will ultimately
have a computational explanation if you like, there ultimately
is an algorithm that we run in our brains,
which is what makes us conscious. So if you
think like that, um given that um digital compu
computation is medium independent, so you can in principle
run any algorithm on any physical hardware and practice,
you might not be able to but in principle,
the, the, the material that a computer is made
of is irrelevant to its ability to perform a
computation. Um THAT gives you uh if you're, if
you buy into this view, then you're going to
think. Well, if consciousness is just the product of
an algorithm running a machine could be built, that
is consciousness in the same way that I have.
So you see this in people that talk about
uploading, they say if we record it from enough
neurons in our brain, and if you mathematically model
the their responses, then in principle, my mind could
be uploaded onto the cloud because it's just an
algorithm and I just need to discover the algorithm
and then I could be have my own conscious
mind after my body has died but a bit,
but my mind will still be operating in this
cloud based platform so that um unit use the
term multiple realization. That's another way of talking about
medium independence. It's saying that any algorithm can be
realized or implemented in a wide array of material
substrates. Um But my conjecture is that people have
been misled into these kinds of views because they
haven't paid enough attention to what's different between brains
and computers. There's good evidence coming from um the
biological side of neuroscience which looks at cell physiology
in its details neuro chemistry, in its details, all
these things going on with glial cells and um
genetic and immunological responses that I could also mention
here that says that what's going on in the
brain making cognition possible is inherently connected with a
whole bunch of other biological processes which are happening,
which are in no way shared with computing machines.
So computers like this one we're using now, uh
obviously not living things, they don't have any of
the metabolic immunological other features that brains have. So
if cognition is inherently depending on the dependent on
this sub consciousness is possible because we have all
of these biological uh features, then we shouldn't expect
a nonliving machine to run consciousness.
Um I mean about the physiology of the brain,
the metabolism and uh immunology and all of that,
would you also add here perhaps some aspects coming
from embodied cognition and the fact that the nervous
system, at least in biological systems also operates within
a body. And so we also have to consider
the rest of the body. I mean, would that
also play a role here in why probably uh
artificial systems wouldn't be able to develop the same
kinds of uh capacities?
Yeah. Yeah. So that that's an important way of
thinking about it. So, by embodied cognition, um what
we're led to pay attention to is the, the
way that neuroscience specializes and treats the brain and
nervous system independently of the rest of uh the
body is itself an idealization. It's a simplifying strategy.
It's like carving out one system to examine independently
of its context and for reasons we talked about
before, like there's too much complexity in the world
to try and take in everything at once. So
you know, standard practice in the biological sciences is
to research one organ at a time, if not
one cell type at a time, but we know
through other observations. Um AND and more and more
of this research is happening often prompted by uh
medical research is that the operation of the nervous
system is deeply interconnected with uh operations from the
rest of the body. So, this gut brain connection
is being focused on intensively in research now, because
of the connection between um the brain and metabolism
and appetite and all those these things. So people
are realizing that if you want to develop a
drug which will help people lose weight, you have
to uh pay attention to that gut brain connection.
Um The gut itself is huge innovated. There's lots
and lots of neurons uh around the gut. And
they're obviously um in contact with the, the brain,
the same for the heart, the whole uh uh
nervous system around the heart, really important to operations
there. And then conversely, um all of the ways
that the immune system and other bodily systems affect
um how the brain operates. Um So, ultimately, the
philosophical position of embodied cognition says that it's, it's
a sort of, if you like an anti dualist
anti Cartesian way, it's a way of thinking it
says that there's been too much of this view
that cognition is this thing like kind of floats
above the rest of the body um like a
pure um immaterial soul. That's what dear said. Actually,
what cognition is, is something very inherent to what
is going on with the body and the body
being. As I just said, this living system that
we don't understand cognition properly unless we understand it
as being a capacity of a living body.
Would you also include the other three ease of
four e cognition here? I mean, also the embedded,
extended and inactive uh aspects of it. Yeah.
So yeah, these, these views are often taken as
a package and I'm I'm pretty sympathetic to um
to the other ones to talk more about the
embodied cognition. I'd say the um uh the inactive.
Um Yeah, I mean, there's details of the in
activism theory that I wouldn't sign up for in
terms of all um perception being to do with
sensory motor contingencies. I think that one of the
ease that I have an attachment to is the
ecological theory. So in my previous book on color,
I was developing an ecological theory of what it
is to have color perception. The extended e that
is um a tricky one because there's actually as
Andy Clark wrote about in this nice paper called
pressing the flesh. There's actually an incompatibility between um
the um most thorough versions of the embodied and
the extended cognition. So as I was just saying,
with embodied cognition, you're really emphasizing the medium dependence
of cognition that it really matters that it happens
in a living body. Whereas the extended mind says
that cognition can occur in these body tool hybrid
systems, these cyborgs or it could even like go
out into nonbiological territory. Um And that's pretty much
saying that the medium doesn't matter because it can
extend out into these non living system. So I
have to say, given that I'm quite um keen
on the embodied side, I'm less keen on the
extended, but
no, that's very interesting because in my conversation with
Dr Randall beer is more or less, the same
is not very fond of the extended bit of
the four e cognition framework. And by the way,
Doctor Louis Favela also, recently we put out a
book, The Ecological Brain ta talking about the logic,
the ecological bit that you mentioned there. So I
also have uh an interview on that on the
show if people are interested. Uh And so one
last question then and since you um are a
philosopher yourself, I mean, you approach things from the
perspective of a philosopher here keeping in mind uh
the main thesis that you develop in your book
about simplifying schemes in neuroscience. How do you look
at the relationship between science and philosophy and how
should they, what kinds of um I don't know
insights. Should they bring to the table when it
comes to dealing with these aspects of theorizing, modeling
and so on in science. And what do you
think are the roles that they can play here?
Um Yeah. So this goes back to the question
that we started out um on and I, I
said a few things about neurop physic neuro philosophy
there and how I, I think there's an unaddressed
problem um about the way that philosophers have tried
to draw on scientific results. Um So once we
have in mind, all of these different ways that
science is simplified, can it really answer the questions
that um naturalistically inclined philosophers, neuro philosophers have tried
to make it speak to in their own research?
Um So I'm sort of raising this as a
question that I hope other people working in this
area will address. It would be great if people
that are really committed to neurop philosophy, sort of
develop a response to this. Um WORRY that I'm
raising because I'm sure there are ways to address
it and respond to this. It's just, it's not
a conversation that I've seen happen yet and I
want to start that conversation. Um The position that
I end up advocating is one that says, um
there are reasons for philosophy of mind to carry
on as an autonomous discipline as well. So there's
been um and I think this is something that
I would accuse neuro philosophy of certainly a scientic
drift to the way people have approached this. So
by scientic, what I mean is just assuming that
the scientific methodology and approach is uniquely the one
that is gonna yield the answers that any of
the answers that you might have about the questions
that you have on a topic. So it sort
of gives a pre eminence to those methodologies. Um
And that's the reason why neurop philosophers have said
to uh other philosophers of mine, you need to
give up your old armchair way of doing philosophy
that ignores the science because that's obsolete now. Um
There's no room for those methodologies that are disconnected
from science. And that's the uh conclusion that I'm
pushing back against because I think if we take
seriously how much idealization there is in science, you
can, you have these worries about the scientists might
be assuming things about the subject matter of the
mind, just the human mind, its place in society
which are incompatible um with um the views that
you might be might be really important to you
as a philosopher. Um And you should operate autonomously
from the science when it is committed to an
idealization that you yourself as a philosopher, see, good
reason to reject. Um So 11 idealization um you
could think about here is um the lack of
normativity that is included in uh research on scientific
research on cognition, which I mean, by which I
mean, um research on cognition abstracts away from value
and normativity. It doesn't see that as an inherent
part of its subject matter that it wants to
investigate. Whereas normativity and values, it's central to how
philosophers need to theorize um topics and philosophy of
mind related to decision making will all these kinds
of things where we have a human stake in
it, which means that value and normativity are important.
So if that's what you're interested in as a
philosopher, that's what you see is important to you,
then you've got good reason to be wary of
importing results from the science which has assumed at
the outset that value and normativity are not relevant.
And it's done that because if you include all
those variables to do with value and normativity, you
end up with too much um to deal with
scientifically. Um So that, so that's an argument for
the autonomy of philosophy from certain scientific um research
projects. Um But also sort of consistent with this
anti scientic conclusion, it does open the door to
philosophy, collaborating with other disciplines. Um So I said
before, well, literature, its use of metaphors, maybe that's
a way of thinking about the world that opens
the door to um to being aware of greater
complexity and interdependence. And maybe philosophers should be paying
attention to those other modes of thinking, those other
cultural discourses as much as they have been um
in recent years, paying attention to scientific results. So
ultimately, it's a very pluralist and um and open,
open position. But I think like given the importance
of neuro philosophy to our discipline, it might to,
some people seem a very controversial or a strange
view to take.
Uh I, I was also smiling when you were
mentioning uh scientism, I mean, using that word and
also how certain neuro philosophers talk about the armchair
philosophers and look a little bit down on them
because I was remembering my first interview with Doctor
Patricia Church, which I will probably also link in
the, in the description to have sort of uh
an opposing view on, on all of these kinds
of topics, which is also interesting. Uh And again,
the book is the Brain Abstracted Simplification and in
the history and philosophy of neuroscience. I'm living also
linked to it in the description of the interview.
And Doctor Shim Muta, uh apart from the book,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Uh Well, I'm kind of um an internet um
hm an internet decliner these days. I, so I'm
not on any social media. Um And that makes
it hard to sell books these days. So I'm
glad to have an interview like this. Um But
no, you, I do have a website, it's called
outside color.net. So all of my papers are linked
to that. Um So you can find a bunch
of papers that are related to this and there's
some more detailed stuff in the history of um
philosophy that I've done um as, as well, his
and history of neuroscience. Um There's various um lectures
that I've done, which are on youtube. So if
you search my name, you'll be able to find
a bunch of stuff there. I was talking about
various topics including the history of computation and, and
how that's related to social economic factors. That's one
of, I think one of my favorite ones there.
Um I think it's called contextualizing the computational mind.
Um And um yeah, and where else do I
exist on the web? Um Not much, but I
do, I do answer emails actually because I'm not
on social media. So people just email me with
a reasonable question out of the blue. I do,
I do make every effort to respond because I,
I just um actually like that old fashioned thing
of like communicating between um actual people as opposed
to just sort of broadcasting my ideas um on
social media. And also I don't like my own
thought process to be too much algorithmically driven. Um
And you can judge from the book itself whether
that is a good strategy or not.
No, for, for sure, for sure. And uh look,
I really love the book. It was a fantastic
read for me at least. And I really hope
that people in the audience uh uh also run
and buy it. It's a great,
yeah, I should also mention that there is an
open access version um that's been made available by
MIT Press. So the PDF is available to download
and maybe I shouldn't say that because that might
affect book sales. But yeah, for people that don't
want to buy the hard copy you can still
read.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
great to talk with you.
Thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall. Her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte bli Nicole Barba, Adam hunt Pavlo Stassi
na Me, Gary, G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
Y Polton John. Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broder Douglas Fry Franka La Gilon Cortez or Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loi Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey, Junior, Old
Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica week in the B brand Nicholas Carlson
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular Johnner Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson Mikela and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers, these our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all